The Westergaard Rules
=====================

This document contains only the rules for simple counterpoint in first,
second, third, and fourth species.

Monotriadic Lines
-----------------

(Note: The S-rules and E-rules correspond to Westergaard's A-rules
and B-rules.)

**Rules of Basic Structure**

*Primary Lines* with a basic step motion


* S1. The final pitch in the basic step motion must be a tonic pitch.
* S2. The first pitch in the basic step motion must be a tonic-triad
  member a third, fifth, or octave above the final pitch.
* S3. These two pitches must be connected by a descending diatonic
  step motion.


*Bass Lines* with a basic arpeggiation

* S1. The final pitch of the basic arpeggiation must be a tonic.
* S2. The first pitch of the basic arpeggiation must be a tonic.
* S3. The middle pitch of the basic arpeggiation must lie a fifth above
  or a fourth below the final pitch of the basic arpeggiation.


*Generic Lines*

* S1. The final pitch of the basic arpeggiation must be a tonic.
* S2. The first pitch of the basic arpeggiation must be a tonic.
* S3. If different, these two pitches may be connect by a diatonic
  step motion.


**Rules of Elaboration**

* E1. Any tonic-triad pitch may be repeated, but not the pitch generated
  by S1.
* E2. A neighbor note may be inserted between consecutive notes with the
  same pitch.
* E3. Any tonic-triad pitch may be inserted prior to the first pitch of
  a basic step motion in primary upper lines or between consecutive notes
  in any type of line, provided that no dissonant leap or leap larger than
  an octave occurs.  (Note that a perfect fourth is a melodic consonance.)
  (In bass lines, insertion of scale degree 3 immediately prior to the
  final tonic should be avoided.)
* E4. Any two consecutive notes forming a leap may be joined by step motion.

**Global Rules for Elaborated Lines**

* G1. All of the pitches in a line should lie within a single register
  (i.e., within the span of a tenth or perhaps twelfth).
* G2. The last two notes of a primary upper line must form a step.
* G3. Lines in minor keys should conform to the melodic minor scale in
  the use of the sixth and seventh scale degrees.  The lower neighbor of
  the tonic pitch is the raised seventh degree.



First Species in Two Parts
--------------------------


**Rules for Constructing the Lines**

#. Each line must be generated by the rules for constructing species lines.
#. The upper line must be a primary upper line.
#. The lower line must be a bass line.


**Rules for Combining Lines**

*Control of Dissonance*

#. Two notes that sound simultaneously must not form a dissonant interval.
   (Remember that the fourth is a vertical dissonance.)

*Forbidden Forms of Motion*

#. No parallel unisons, octaves, or fifths between consecutive
   simultaneities.
#. No non-consecutive parallel unisons or octaves that result from
   parallel structures in their lines, unless the intervening simultaneity
   includes a pitch dissonant with the first unison or octave.
#. No similar motion to or from a unison.
#. No similar motion to an octave unless both notes forming the octave
   are the final tonics in their respective basic structures and the upper
   note is approached by step.
#. No similar motion to a fifth unless the upper note is approached by
   step and is either the fifth or second scale degree.
#. No voice crossing, overlapping, or cross relations.

*Bass Leaps of a Fourth*

#. If the bass leaps a fourth, one of the two notes in the upper line that
   coincides with the two notes forming the fourth must form a second or
   a seventh with the contiguous (non-simultaneous) bass note.

*Sonority*

#. Prefer imperfect consonances.
#. Prefer to use a fifth or octave in the midst of the composition only
   where the emphasis provided by that interval will help to stress
   a pitch that belongs to the basic structure.
#. Avoid unisons except in the first and last measures.
#. Avoid intervals larger than a tenth.


Second Species in Two Parts
---------------------------

**Rules for Constructing the Half-Note Line**

#. The half-note line may begin either on or off the beat, that is,
   it may begin with a half rest.
#. The last note in the line is a whole note initiated with the last
   note of the whole-note line.
#. The half-note line must not include any immediate repetitions.
#. Modification of the global rule for final step in a primary upper line.
   If the half-note line is a primary upper line with basic step motion,
   at least one note in the penultimate bar of the line must be consonant
   and must lie a step away from the final tonic.  If the step-related
   note is the first note in the penultimate bar, the second note must
   not displace it by step.

**Rules for Combining Lines**

*Control of Dissonance*

#. On the beat: all intervals must be consonant, as in first species.
#. Off the beat: the interval may be dissonant if the half note is
   approached and left by step, that is if it is a dissonant passing tone
   or a dissonant neighbor.

*Forbidden Forms of Motion*

#. On the beat to off the beat: since all motion is oblique, the only
   restriction is against the bass crossing the upper voice.
#. Off the beat to on the beat: as in first species, except that cross
   relations are permitted if the half notes form steps.
#. On the beat to on the beat

   * No parallel unisons or octaves.
   * No parallel motion to a perfect fifth except where the half note
     forming the second fifth is approached and left by a step motion
     in the opposite direction from the parallel fifths.

#. Off the beat to off the beat

   * No parallel unisons.
   * Parallel octaves related by seconds may occur, but only if the two
     off-the-beat half notes are approached from opposite directions.
   * Parallel octaves related by any other interval may occur if either

     #. the two off-the-beat half notes are approached from opposite
        directions, or
     #. the first off-the-beat half note is left by step.

#. No noncontiguous cross relations between an on-the-beat half note and
   the whole note in the next measure unless the half note moves by step.

*Bass Leaps of a Fourth*

#. When the half-note line occurs in the bass:

   * A leap of a fourth may not occur within a measure.
   * A leap of a fourth may occur off the beat to on the beat if either

     #. one of the half notes in the fourth forms a second or seventh
        with the contiguous whole note, or
     #. the pitch of the preceding on-the-beat half note lies a step
        away from the pitch of the second note of the fourth.

#. When the whole-note line occurs in the bass: 

   * A fourth is permitted in the bass if there is a half-note in the
     upper line that

     #. sounds during and is consonant with one of the notes forming
        the fourth,
     #. forms a second or seventh with the other, and
     #. either

        * falls on the beat,
        * is approached by leap, or
        * is contiguous with the note it forms a second or seventh with.


*Sonority*

#. On the beat: as in first species.
#. Off the beat: any interval is permitted, but dissonant intervals
   are preferred.


Third Species: Two Lines
------------------------

**Constructing Lines in Third Species**

#. The species line may begin on any part of the first measure.
#. The last note in the species line is a whole note initiated with the
   last note of the whole-note line.
#. Localized rule E1 (L1). In this line (but not the whole-note line) any
   consonant pitch may be repeated within a measure.
#. No immediate repetitions may remain in the completed line.  If rule E1
   is applied, then some other rule must be applied subsequently to insert
   a note between the pitch and its repetition.
#. Localized rule E2 (L2).A neighbor may be inserted between a locally
   consonant pitch and its repetition. In minor, the lower neighbor to the
   diatonic or raised seventh degree, is the raised sixth degree; and the
   upper neighbor to the diatonic or raised sixth degree is the lowered
   seventh degree.
#. Localized rule E3 (L3). [#f1]_ A non–tonic-triad pitch may be inserted
   within a measure if

   * the inserted pitch is consonant with the whole note,
   * another note in the measure is consonant with the whole note and
     generated by the global rules,
   * the inserted pitch is linearly consonant with this globally generated
     note and with every other locally consonant pitch that is approached
     or left by leap, and
   * the inserted pitch is eventually displaced (scale-wise) by
     a tonic-triad pitch.
    
#. Localized rule E4 (L4). Two locally consonant pitches may be may be
   joined by a step motion.

**Rules for Combining Lines**

*Control of Dissonance*

#. On the beat: as in second species.
#. Off the beat:

   * Any interval may be dissonant as long as it is approached and left
     by step.
   * If two consecutive intervals are dissonant, they must be approached
     and left in the same direction.

*Forbidden Forms of Motion*

#. On the beat to immediately following off the beat, or off the beat to
   immediately following off the beat:

   * The bass may not cross the upper voice.

#. Off the beat to immediately following beat (across the barline):

   * As in first and second species.

#. On the beat to on the beat:

   * No parallel unisons.
   * No parallel octaves or fifths except where either the half or
     quarter note forming the second octave or fifth is approached and
     left by a step motion moving in the opposite direction to the parallel
     motion, or the pitch of the second octave or fifth appears as a
     consonance in the preceding measure.

#. Off the beat to next (but not immediately following) on the beat
   (in the next measure):

   * No parallel unisons.
   * No parallel octaves except where either the note forming the second
     octave is approached and left by a step motion moving in the opposite
     direction to the parallel motion, or the pitch of the second octave
     appears as a consonance in the preceding measure.

*Bass Leaps of a Fourth*

#. When the triplet-half- or quarter-note line occurs in the bass:

   * A leap or a fourth may not occur within a measure unless the same
     measure includes a lower pitch that is consonant with both pitches
     forming the fourth.

   * A leap of a fourth may occur off the beat to on the beat if either

     #. one of the notes in the fourth forms a second or seventh with
        the contiguous whole note, or
     #. the pitch of either the immediately preceding off-the-beat note
        or the preceding on-the-beat note lies a step away from the pitch
        of the second note of the fourth.

#. When the whole-note line occurs in the bass:

   * A fourth is permitted in the bass if there is a note in the upper
     line that either

     #. sounds during and is consonant with the first of the notes forming
        the fourth, forms a second or seventh with the second of the notes
        forming the fourth, and either

        * comes at the beginning of the measure or end of the measure, or
        * is not followed in that measure by a note a step away that
          is consonant;

     #. or sounds during and is consonant with the second of the notes
        forming the fourth, forms a second or seventh with the first of the
        notes forming the fourth, and either

        * comes at the beginning of the measure, or
        * is not preceded in that measure by a note a step away that
          is consonant.

*Sonority*

#. On the beat: as in first species.
#. Off the beat: any interval is permitted, but dissonant intervals are
   preferred, especially for the final off-the-beat note.


Fourth Species: Two Lines
-------------------------

**Rules for Constructing the Syncopated Line**

#. The syncopated line must begin off the beat, following a half rest.
#. The last note in the line is a breve initiated with the last note
   of the whole-note line.
#. The syncopated line must not include any immediate repetitions.
#. The syncopated line may switch to second species once in the middle
   of the composition, but the line must begin with at least three
   syncopes and must immediately return to fourth species. [#f2]_

**Rules for Combining Lines**

*Control of Dissonance*

#. Off the beat: all notes must be consonant.
#. On the beat: a note may be consonant or dissonant. If it forms a
   dissonance, it must move down by step to form one of the following
   successions of intervals against the whole note:

   * 7–6, 9–8, and 4–3 for suspensions in the upper line, and
   * 2–3, augmented 4–5 (but not perfect 4–5), and augmented or diminished
     5–6 for suspensions in the lower line.

*Forbidden Forms of Motion*

#. End of the piece: as in second species.
#. Off the beat to the next off the beat: no parallel unisons; parallel
   octaves may occur only if the intervening interval is consonant.
#. On the beat to the next on the beat: no parallel unisons.

*Bass Leaps of a Fourth*

#. Leaps of a fourth in the bass:

   * If the whole note line is in the bass, a leap of a fourth is permitted
     if either

     #. the first note of the fourth is dissonant with the second note in
        the next measure,	or
     #. the second note of the fourth is dissonant with the syncopated note.

   * If the species line is in the bass, a leap of a fourth may occur only
     at the end.

*Sonority*

#. The full sonority of seconds and sevenths is preferred — suspended —
   on the beat.


First Species: Three Lines
--------------------------

**Construction of Lines**

#. The lowest line must have the structure of a bass line.
#. One upper line, not necessarily the highest, must have a basic
   step motion.
#. The other upper line may have the structure of either a generic or
   primary upper line.

**Rules for Combining Lines**

*Control of Dissonance*

#. No dissonance may be formed between simultaneous notes. (Though the
   fourth is a harmonic dissonance when formed between an upper voice and
   the bass, fourths between upper voices are considered consonant.)
   Exception: An augmented fourth or diminished fifth is allowed between
   the upper voices if the bass forms a sixth with one upper voice and
   a third with the other.

*Forbidden Forms of Motion*

#. No parallel unisons, octaves or fifths between consecutive notes in
   any pair of lines.
#. No non-consecutive parallel unisons or octaves unless the intervening
   simultaneity includes either (a) a pitch forming a second or seventh
   with the first unison or octave or (b) a member of the same pitch class
   as the pitches of the second unison or octave.
#. No similar motion to or from a unison.
#. No similar motion to an octave unless the upper note is approached by
   step and both notes forming the octave are the final tonics in their
   respective basic structures.
#. No similar motion to a fifth unless the upper note is approached by
   step and either the upper note is the fifth or second scale degree or
   the fifth is in the upper two voices and the bass note is a member of
   a different pitch class.
#. No voice crossing or overlapping between the bass and either upper line.
   The upper voices may cross or overlap so long as the structure of each
   line is clear.
#. No cross relations unless the third line moves by step at the same time
   that the second note of the cross relation occurs.

*Bass Leaps of a Fourth*

#. There must be a note in one of the upper lines that sounds simultaneously
   with one of the notes forming the fourth and creates a second or seventh
   with the other note forming the fourth.

*Sonority*

#. A sonority of three different pitch classes in each measure is most
   satisfactory.  Where impossible or undesirable, use the next fullest
   sonority (two notes of one pitch class and a third forming an imperfect
   consonance with the other two).
#. Avoid simultaneities that form only perfect intervals except at the
   beginning and end.
#. The upper two voices should rarely be further than an octave apart.


Endnotes
--------

.. [#f1] Permitting local insertions is an extension of the rules
   not found in Westergaard.

.. [#f2] Permitting a break in the syncopations is an extension of the
   rules not found in Westergaard.
